Add C++ Solution + Editorial to Parsa's Humongous Tree (Gold) (#2638)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cf-1528A.mdx

---
id: cf-1528A
source: CF
title: Parsa's Humongous Tree
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Editorial (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/91058)

## Explanation

> Let's go through a case where we've already computed the beauty values for all of vertex $u$'s neighbors.

Reviewer: emphasize that this is a 100% hypothetical scenario
"say, hypothetically, for the sake of the argument, that we already computed all the best beauty values for all of vertext..."

Let $\texttt{range}_u$ store $l_u$ and $r_u$ and $\texttt{adj}_u$ store the beauty values of all vertices adjacent to $u$.

$\texttt{range}_u = \{1, 10\}$

$\texttt{adj}_u = \{2, 3, 6, 9\}$

> Let's say that we select $7$, can we do better?

Reviewer: Say we select $7$ as our current vertex value, leading to a beauty value of [ASDF]. Can we do better than this?

The current beauty sum is: $|7-2| + |7-3| + |7-6| + |7-9| = 12$.

> Can we do better?
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Intuitively, for any $X$ that we choose to be $u$'s beauty value, if there's more elements that are greater than this $X$, making $X$ as small as possible would be more optimal (increasing differences for these elements) and vice versa. Note that in a case where the number of greater beauty values is the same as the number of smaller beauty values, setting $X$ to the minimum or maximum will never decrease the answer.

Reviewer: hey maybe you should include that thing about the median
you know how if you wanna minimize the error you select the median?
well in this case we wanna go as goddamn far from the median as possible
and then you can link to a math.stackexchange link or something

Author: sure

> It turns out, this observation is all we need. Since setting $u$ to $l_u$ or $r_u$ is always optimal, we'll handle this through DP.

Reviewer: > Since setting $u$ to $l_u$ or $r_u$ is always optimal

elaborate?

Author: that was like the main point of the previous paragraph?
<img width="852" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/81596991/159806127-64fcbc61-0250-44ec-ae51-dc3e964a8e02.png">

Reviewer: i... don't really get the last sentence lmao

Author: oops, ill make it clearer

If $\texttt{dp}[i][j]$ stores the maximum sum of beauty values at the subtree rooted at $i$ when $i$'s "beauty type" is $j$. Since $i$ can only take two values, $j$ will be equal to $0$ when $u$'s beauty value is $l_u$ and $1$ when $u$'s beauty value is $r_u$.

Our transitions are:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 0} \mathrel{+}= \max(\texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 0}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 0}|)$

> $\texttt{dp}_{u \space 1} \mathrel{+}= \max( \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 1}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 1}|)$

Reviewer: (optional) explain this with plain text instead of some eldritch math formula

Author: i think ill use both

---
id: cf-1528A
source: CF
title: Parsa's Humongous Tree
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Editorial (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/91058)

## Explanation

Without loss of generality, let's assume we've already computed the best beauty values for all of vertex $u$'s neighbors.

Let $\texttt{range}_u$ store $l_u$ and $r_u$ and $\texttt{adj}_u$ store the beauty values of all vertices adjacent to $u$.

$\texttt{range}_u = \{1, 10\}$

$\texttt{adj}_u = \{2, 3, 6, 9\}$

Let's say that we select $7$, which gives us a beauty of $|7-2| + |7-3| + |7-6| + |7-9| = 12$. Can we do better than this?

> Intuitively, for any $X$ that we choose to be $u$'s beauty value, if there's more elements that are greater than this $X$, making $X$ as small as possible would be more optimal (increasing differences for these elements) and vice versa. Note that in a case where the number of greater beauty values is the same as the number of smaller beauty values, setting $X$ to the minimum or maximum will never decrease the answer. Moving $X$ will always reciprocate or increase the beauty lost on the other side.

Reviewer: > Moving $X$ will always reciprocate or increase the beauty lost on the other side.

?

For a more rigorous explanation, note that [choosing the median minimizes the sum of absolute deviation](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/85448/why-does-the-median-minimize-ex-c), so we'd want to get as far away from the median as possible.

It turns out, this observation is all we need. Since setting $u$ to $l_u$ or $r_u$ is always optimal, we'll handle this through DP.

> If $\texttt{dp}[i][j]$ stores the maximum sum of beauty values at the subtree rooted at $i$ when $i$'s "beauty type" is $j$. Since $i$ can only take two values, $j$ will be equal to $0$ when $u$'s beauty value is $l_u$ and $1$ when $u$'s beauty value is $r_u$.

Reviewer: > Since $i$ can only take two values

`i`? u sure bout that?

Author: `i` can only be `l_i` or `r_i`

Author: oops ill clarify by writing vertex `i`

Our transitions are:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 0} \mathrel{+}= \max(\texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 0}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 0}|)$

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 1} \mathrel{+}= \max( \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 1}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 1}|)$

This essentially means:

If $u$ has the beauty $l_u$:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 0} \mathrel{+}= \max($beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $l_v$, beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $r_v$)

If $u$ has the beauty $r_u$:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 1} \mathrel{+}= \max($beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $l_v$, beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $r_v$)

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::vector;
using std::pair;

int t;

> int n;

Reviewer: remove these globals

vector<vector<int>> adj;
vector<pair<int, int>> range;
vector<vector<long long>> dp;

> long long mx_beauty(int u, int v, bool type) {

Reviewer: comment for this method

	if (!type) {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	} else {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	}
}
void dfs(int u, int par) {
	for (int v : adj[u]) {
		if (v == par) {
			continue;
		}

		dfs(v, u);
		dp[u][0] += mx_beauty(u, v, 0);
		dp[u][1] += mx_beauty(u, v, 1);
	}
}

int main() {

> 	std::cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);
> 
> 	std::cin >> t;
> 
> 	for (int _ = 0; _ < t; _++) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	std::cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);
	
	int test_num;
	std::cin >> test_num;
	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) {
```

---
id: cf-1528A
source: CF
title: Parsa's Humongous Tree
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Editorial (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/91058)

## Explanation

Without loss of generality, let's assume we've already computed the best beauty values for all of vertex $u$'s neighbors.

Let $\texttt{range}_u$ store $l_u$ and $r_u$ and $\texttt{adj}_u$ store the beauty values of all vertices adjacent to $u$.

$\texttt{range}_u = \{1, 10\}$

$\texttt{adj}_u = \{2, 3, 6, 9\}$

Let's say that we select $7$, which gives us a beauty of $|7-2| + |7-3| + |7-6| + |7-9| = 12$. Can we do better than this?

Intuitively, for any $X$ that we choose to be $u$'s beauty value, if there's more elements that are greater than this $X$, making $X$ as small as possible would be more optimal (increasing differences for these elements) and vice versa. Note that in a case where the number of greater beauty values is the same as the number of smaller beauty values, setting $X$ to the minimum or maximum will never decrease the answer. Moving $X$ will always increase the distance for the other end of the beauty values.

> For a more rigorous explanation, note that [choosing the median minimizes the sum of absolute deviation](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/85448/why-does-the-median-minimize-ex-c), so we'd want to get as far away from the median as possible.

Reviewer 2: https://usaco.guide/general/working-mdx/#info-block using the info block would be better here

Author: lmk if the info block's title is kinda weird, i couldn't think of a better one

> It turns out, this observation is all we need. Since setting $u$ to $l_u$ or $r_u$ is always optimal, we'll handle this through DP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This observation is all we need. Since setting $u$ to $l_u$ or $r_u$ is always optimal, we'll handle this through DP.
```

---
id: cf-1528A
source: CF
title: Parsa's Humongous Tree
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Editorial (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/91058)

## Explanation

Without loss of generality, let's assume we've already computed the best beauty values for all of vertex $u$'s neighbors.

Let $\texttt{range}_u$ store $l_u$ and $r_u$ and $\texttt{adj}_u$ store the beauty values of all vertices adjacent to $u$.

$\texttt{range}_u = \{1, 10\}$

$\texttt{adj}_u = \{2, 3, 6, 9\}$

Let's say that we select $7$, which gives us a beauty of $|7-2| + |7-3| + |7-6| + |7-9| = 12$. Can we do better than this?

Intuitively, for any $X$ that we choose to be $u$'s beauty value, if there's more elements that are greater than this $X$, making $X$ as small as possible would be more optimal (increasing differences for these elements) and vice versa. Note that in a case where the number of greater beauty values is the same as the number of smaller beauty values, setting $X$ to the minimum or maximum will never decrease the answer. Moving $X$ will always increase the distance for the other end of the beauty values.

> <Info title="A more math-oriented approach">
> Note that [choosing the median minimizes the sum of absolute deviation](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/85448/why-does-the-median-minimize-ex-c), so we'd want to get as far away from the median as possible.
> </Info>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Info title="Why does this work?">
[Choosing the median minimizes the sum of absolute deviation](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/85448/why-does-the-median-minimize-ex-c), so we'd want to get as far away from the median as possible.
</Info>
```
maybe this

Author: this is so much better, tysm!

vector<vector<long long>> dp;

// return optimal beauty value for vertex u with subtree v
long long mx_beauty(int u, int v, bool type) {
	if (!type) {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	} else {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	}
}
void dfs(int u, int par) {
	for (int v : adj[u]) {
		if (v == par) {
			continue;
		}

		dfs(v, u);
		dp[u][0] += mx_beauty(u, v, 0);
		dp[u][1] += mx_beauty(u, v, 1);
	}
}

int main() {
	std::cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);
	
	int test_num;
	int n;
	
	std::cin >> test_num;
	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) {
		std::cin >> n;

		range.clear();
		adj.assign(n, {});
		dp.assign(n, vector<long long>(2, 0));
		
		for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
			int l;
			int r;
			std::cin >> l >> r;

			range.emplace_back(std::make_pair(l, r));
		}

		for (int i = 0; i < n - 1; i++) {
			int u;
			int v;
			std::cin >> u >> v;

			adj[--u].push_back(--v);
			adj[v].push_back(u);
		}

> 		dfs(0, -1);

Reviewer: define a constant ROOT as 0
then just do dfs(ROOT, ROOT)

Our transitions are:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 0} \mathrel{+}= \max(\texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 0}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 0}|)$

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 1} \mathrel{+}= \max( \texttt{dp}_{v \space 1} + |range_{u \space 1} - range_{v \space 1}|, \texttt{dp}_{v \space 0} + |range_{u \space 0} - range_{v \space 1}|)$

This essentially means:

If $u$ has the beauty $l_u$:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 0} \mathrel{+}= \max($beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $l_v$, beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $r_v$)

If $u$ has the beauty $r_u$:

$\texttt{dp}_{u \space 1} \mathrel{+}= \max($beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $l_v$, beauty if $v$ has a beauty value of $r_v$)

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <algorithm>

using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::vector;
using std::pair;

> const int ROOT = 0;

Author: done

vector<vector<int>> adj;
vector<pair<int, int>> range;
vector<vector<long long>> dp;

// return optimal beauty value for vertex u with subtree v
long long mx_beauty(int u, int v, bool type) {
	if (!type) {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].first - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	} else {
		long long swtch = dp[v][1] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].second);
		long long sm = dp[v][0] + abs(range[u].second - range[v].first);

		return std::max(swtch, sm);
	}

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
}

```

void dfs(int u, int par) {
	for (int v : adj[u]) {
		if (v == par) {
			continue;
		}

		dfs(v, u);
		dp[u][0] += mx_beauty(u, v, 0);
		dp[u][1] += mx_beauty(u, v, 1);
	}
}

int main() {
	std::cin.tie(0)->sync_with_stdio(0);

> 	

Reviewer: does it run w/o?

Author: nope

Reviewer: understandable have a nice day

	int test_num;

> 	int n;

Reviewer: put this in the for loop

	for (int t = 0; t < test_num; t++) {
		int n;
		std::cin >> n;

		range.clear();
		adj.assign(n, {});
		dp.assign(n, vector<long long>(2, 0));
		
		for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
			int l;
			int r;

> 			std::cin >> l >> r;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
			cin >> l >> r;
```

> 			range.emplace_back(std::make_pair(l, r));

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
			range.push_back(make_pair(l, r));
```

Reviewer: this i agree with

Reviewer 4: not too sure, but if you `emplace_back` doesn't that mean you don't need to `make_pair`? like wouldn't `range.emplace_back(l, r);` just work?

Author: oh, i didn't know that, thanks!

		}

		for (int i = 0; i < n - 1; i++) {
			int u;
			int v;

> 			std::cin >> u >> v;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
			cin >> u >> v;
```

			adj[--u].push_back(--v);
			adj[v].push_back(u);

> 		}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		}
		
```
also, see aadit's comment

		dfs(ROOT, ROOT);

> 		cout << std::max(dp[0][0], dp[0][1]) << endl;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		cout << max(dp[0][0], dp[0][1]) << "\n";
```

---
id: cf-1528A
source: CF
title: Parsa's Humongous Tree
author: Ryan Chou
---

[Official Editorial (C++)](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/91058)

## Explanation

Without loss of generality, let's assume we've already computed the best beauty values for all of vertex $u$'s neighbors.

Let $\texttt{range}_u$ store $l_u$ and $r_u$ and $\texttt{adj}_u$ store the beauty values of all vertices adjacent to $u$.

> $\texttt{range}_u = \{1, 10\}$

Reviewer 5: I think you should note that this an example

Reviewer: this
